[TM] Creating a dynamic layout (#3716)
qgis/QGIS-Documentation: source/docs/training_manual/map_composer/map_composer.rst

Congratulations on your first completed QGIS map project!

|LS| Creating a Dynamic Print Layout
===============================================================================

Now that you've learned to create a basic map layout we go a step further and
create a map layout that adapts dynamically to our map extent and to the page
properties, e.g. when you change the size of the page. Also, the date of creation
will adapt dynamically.

|moderate| |FA| Creating the dynamic map canvas
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> * Load the vector layer regions.shp into the map canvas and adapt its properties

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Load the ESRI Shapefile format dataset :file:`regions.shp` into the map canvas and adapt its properties
```

  to suit your own convenience.
* After everything is rendered and symbolized to your liking,
  click the |newLayout| :sup:`New Print Layout` icon in the toolbar or
  choose :menuselection:`File --> New Print Layout`. You will be prompted to

>   choose a title for the new layer,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  choose a title for the new layer.
```

> * We want to create a map layout consisting of a header and a map about the regions of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* We want to create a map layout consisting of a header and a map with the regions of
```

  Alaska. The layout should have a margin of 7.5 mm and the header should be 36mm high.

> * Create a map item called ``main map`` onto the canvas and go into the :guilabel:`Layout` panel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Create a map item called ``main map`` on the canvas and go to the :guilabel:`Layout` panel.
```

>   Choose the :guilabel:`Variables` menu and go to the :guilabel:`Layout` menu. Here we set some variables you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Scroll down to the :guilabel:`Variables` section and find the :guilabel:`Layout` part.
  Here we set some variables you
```

>   can use all over the dynamic print layout. The first variable defines the margin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  can use all over the dynamic print layout. The first variable will define the margin.
```

  Press the |signPlus| button and type in the name ``rg_layout_margin``. Set the value to ``7.5``. Press
  the |signPlus| button again and type in the name ``rg_layout_height_header``. Set the value to ``36``.
* Now you are ready to create the position and the size of the map canvas automatically

>   by means of the variables. Go to the :guilabel:`Item Properties` panel and open the menu :guilabel:`Position and Size`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  by means of the variables. Go to the :guilabel:`Item Properties` panel and open the :guilabel:`Position and Size` section.
```

>   Click the |dataDefineExpressionOn| :sup:`Data defined override` for ``X``. From :guilabel:`Variables`, choose ``@rg_layout_margin``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Click the |dataDefineExpressionOn| :sup:`Data defined override` for ``X``.
  From :guilabel:`Variables`, choose ``@rg_layout_margin``.
```

>   Click the |dataDefineExpressionOn| :sup:`Data defined override` for ``Y``. Choose :guilabel:`Edit...` and type in the formula

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Click the |dataDefineExpressionOn| :sup:`Data defined override` for ``Y``.
  Choose :guilabel:`Edit...` and type in the formula
```

  ``to_real(@rg_layout_margin) + to_real(@rg_layout_height_header)``. This means that the

>   reference point will have the X-Position of 7.5 mm and the Y-Postion of 43.5 mmm where

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  reference point (where the header ends) will have 7.5 mm as its X-Position and 43.5 mm as its Y-Postion.
```

>   the header ends. Notice that the values for the Y-Position have to be converted from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Notice that the values used for the Y-Position have to be converted from
```

  string to a real number. Now finally let's define the width and height of the map canvas.

>   For ``Width`` use the |dataDefineExpressionOn| :sup:`Data defined override` typing in ``@layout_pagewidth - @zg_layout_rand * 2'``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  For ``Width`` use the |dataDefineExpressionOn| :sup:`Data defined override` typing in
  ``@layout_pagewidth - @zg_layout_rand * 2'``
```

>   under :guilabel:`Edit...` . Here the variable ``layout_pagewidth`` that QGIS creates automatically is used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  under :guilabel:`Edit...`. Here the variable ``layout_pagewidth`` (created automatically by QGIS) is used.
```

>   Finally, set the ``Height`` with the expression ``@layout_pageheight -  @rg_layout_header -  @rg_layout_margin * 2``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Finally, set the :guilabel:`Height` with the expression
  ``@layout_pageheight -  @rg_layout_header -  @rg_layout_margin * 2``
```

  with the |dataDefineExpressionOn| :sup:`Data defined override`.

> * We will also create a grid containing the coordinates of the main canvas map extend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* We will also create a grid containing the coordinates of the main canvas map extent.
```

>   Go to the :guilabel:`Item Properties` again and choose the menu :guilabel:`Grids`. Insert a grid by clicking the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Go to :guilabel:`Item Properties` again and choose the :guilabel:`Grids` section. Insert a grid by clicking the
```

  |signPlus| button. Go to :guilabel:`Modify grid ...` and apply the Intervals for X, Y and Offset according

>   to the map scale you choosed in the QGIS main canvas. The Grid type :guilabel:`Cross` is very well suited

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  to the map scale you chose in the QGIS main canvas. The Grid type :guilabel:`Cross` is very well suited
```

  for our purposes.
   
|moderate| |FA| Creating the dynamic header
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> * First step is that you insert a rectangle which will be the header with the |addBasicShape| :sup:`Add Shape` Item. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Insert a rectangle which will contain the header with the |addBasicShape| :sup:`Add Shape` button. 
```

  In the :guilabel:`Items` panel enter the name ``header``.

> * Again, go to the :guilabel:`Item Properties` and open the menu :guilabel:`Position and Size`. Using the |dataDefineOn| :sup:`Data defined override`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Again, go to the :guilabel:`Item Properties` and open the :guilabel:`Position and Size` section.
  Using the |dataDefineOn| :sup:`Data defined override`,
```

>   choose the ``@rg_layout_margin`` variable for ``X`` as well as for ``Y``. The width is defined by the expression

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  choose the ``@rg_layout_margin`` variable for :guilabel:`X` as well as for :guilabel:`Y`.
  :guilabel:`Width` shall be defined by the expression
```

>   ``@layout_pagewidth - @zg_layout_rand * 2`` and the height by the expression ``@rg_layout_header``. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ``@layout_pagewidth - @zg_layout_rand * 2`` and :guilabel:`Height` by the expression ``@rg_layout_header``. 
```

* We will insert a horizontal line and two vertical lines to divide the header into different sections

>   using the |addNodesShape| :sup:`Add Node Item`. Create a horizontal line and two vertical lines. After entering the names

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  using the |addNodesShape| :sup:`Add Node Item`. Create a horizontal line and two vertical lines.
  After entering the names
```

>   insert the expression ``@rg_layout_margin`` and ``@rg_layout_margin + 8`` for X and Y and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  insert the expression ``@rg_layout_margin`` and ``@rg_layout_margin + 8`` for :guilabel:`X` and :guilabel:`Y`, and
```

>   ``@layout_pagewidth -  @rg_layout_margin * 2 - 53.5`` for the width of the horizontal line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ``@layout_pagewidth -  @rg_layout_margin * 2 - 53.5`` for the :guilabel:`Width`.
```

> * The first vertical line is defined by ``@layout_pagewidth -  @rg_layout_margin * 2 - 53.5`` for ``X``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The first vertical line is defined by ``@layout_pagewidth -  @rg_layout_margin * 2 - 53.5`` for :guilabel:`X`
```

>   and ``@rg_layout_margin`` for ``Y``. It's defined by the height of the header we created, so enter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  and ``@rg_layout_margin`` for :guilabel:`Y`. It's defined by the height of the header we created, so enter
```

>   the expression ``@rg_layout_height_header`` for ``Height``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  the expression ``@rg_layout_height_header`` for :guilabel:`Height`.
```

  The second vertical line is placed left to it. Enter the expression ``@layout_pagewidth-@rg_layout_margin*2-83.5``

>   for ``X`` and ``@rg_layout_margin`` for ``Y``. It has the same height as the first vertical line: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  for :guilabel:`X` and ``@rg_layout_margin`` for :guilabel:`Y`.
  It shall have the same value for :guilabel:`Height` as the first vertical line: 
```

  ``@rg_layout_height_header``. The figure below shows the structure of our dynamic layout. We will fill

>   the fields we created by the lines with some elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  the areas created by the lines with some elements.
```

.. figure:: img/dynamic_layout_structure.png
   :align: center

> |moderate| |FA| Creating the labels of the dynamic header

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|moderate| |FA| Creating labels for the dynamic header
```

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> * You can enter the project title of your QGIS project automatically. This title has to be set

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The title of your QGIS project can be included automatically. The title is set
```

>   in the :guilabel:`Project Properties` first. Insert a label with the |addLabel| :sup:`Adds a new Label to the layout` Item

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  in the :guilabel:`Project Properties`. Insert a label with the |addLabel| :sup:`Adds a new Label to the layout` button
```

  and enter the name ``project title (variable)``.

>   In the :guilabel:`Main Properties` of the :guilabel:`Items Properties` Panel enter the expression ``[%@project title%]``. Set the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  In the :guilabel:`Main Properties` of the :guilabel:`Items Properties` Panel enter the expression
  ``[%@project title%]``. Set the
```

>   position of the label with the expression ``@rg_layout_margin +3`` for ``X`` and ``@rg_layout_margin + 0.25`` for ``Y``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  position of the label with the expression ``@rg_layout_margin +3`` for :guilabel:`X` and ``@rg_layout_margin + 0.25`` for :guilabel:`Y`.
```

>   The label box should have a width of 105 mm. Enter the expression ``@layout_pagewidth - @rg_layout_margin *2 -90``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Enter the expression ``@layout_pagewidth - @rg_layout_margin *2 -90`` for :guilabel:`Width` (this should
```

>   for Width and enter ``11,25`` for Height. Under :guilabel:`Appearance` set the Font to 16 pt.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  give a width of 105 mm) and enter ``11.25`` for :guilabel:`Height`. Under :guilabel:`Appearance` set the Font to 16 pt.
```

* The second label will include a description of the map you created. Again, insert a label and name it

>   ``map description``. In the Main Properties also enter the text ``map description``. Here also enter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ``map description``. In the :guilabel:`Main Properties` also enter the text ``map description``. Here also enter
```

>   the date of description by typing in ``printed on: [%format_date(now(),'dd.MM.yyyy')%]``. We are using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  the date using ``printed on: [%format_date(now(),'dd.MM.yyyy')%]``. We are again using
```

>   a variable that QGIS creates automatically again. For x insert the expression ``@rg_layout_margin +3`` and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  a variable that QGIS creates automatically. For :guilabel:`X` insert the expression ``@rg_layout_margin +3`` and
```

>   for y enter the expression ``@rg_layout_margin +11.5``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  for :guilabel:`Y` enter the expression ``@rg_layout_margin + 11.5``.
```

> * The third label will include information about your organisation. We will create some variables first

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The third label will include information about your organisation. First we will create some variables
```

>   in the :guilabel:`Variables` menu of the :guilabel:`Item Properties`. Go to the :guilabel:`Layout` menu, click the |signPlus| button each time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  in the :guilabel:`Variables` menu of the :guilabel:`Item Properties`. Go to the :guilabel:`Layout` menu, click the
  |signPlus| button for each new variable
```

  and enter the names ``o_department``, ``o_name`` , ``o_adress`` and ``o_postcode`` as shown in the picture below.
  In the second row enter the detailed information about your organisation. We will use these variables in the :guilabel:`Main Properties`

>   menu. The position is defined by ``@layout_pagewidth - @rg_layout_margin - 49.5`` for ``X`` and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  section. The position is defined by ``@layout_pagewidth - @rg_layout_margin - 49.5`` for :guilabel:`X` and
```

>   ``@rg_layout_margin + 15.5`` for ``Y``. The ``Width`` is ``49,00`` and the ``Height`` is defined by ``@rg_layout_header - 15.5``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ``@rg_layout_margin + 15.5`` for :guilabel:`Y`. :guilabel:`Width` is ``49.00`` and :guilabel:`Height` is defined by ``@rg_layout_header - 15.5``.
```

.. figure:: img/dynamic_layout_organisation.png

> |moderate| |FA| Creating the pictures of the dynamic header

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|moderate| |FA| Adding pictures to the dynamic header
```

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> * Go to the |addNewImage| :sup:`Adds a new Picture to the layout` item and place a picture on top of your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Use the |addNewImage| :sup:`Adds a new Picture to the layout` button to place a picture on top of your
```

  label ``organisation information``. After entering the name ``organisation logo`` define the position

>   for ``X`` with ``@layout_pagewidth - @rg_layout_margin-48.5`` and for ``Y`` with ``@rg_layout_margin+3.5``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  for :guilabel:`X` with ``@layout_pagewidth - @rg_layout_margin-48.5`` and for :guilabel:`Y` with
  ``@rg_layout_margin+3.5``.
```

>   The size of the logo is defined statically by ``39,292`` for ``Width`` and ``9,583`` for ``Height``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The size of the logo is set to ``39.292`` for :guilabel:`Width` and ``9.583`` for :guilabel:`Height`.
```

  To include a logo of your organisation you have to save your logo under your home directory and enter
  the path under :menuselection:`Main Properties --> Image Source`.
* Our layout still needs a north arrow. This will also be insterted by using |addNewImage| :sup:`Adds a new Picture to the layout`.

>   Give the name ``nort arrow`` and go to :menuselection:``Main Properties`` and select the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Set the name to ``north arrow``, go to :guilabel:`Main Properties` and select the
```

>   :guilabel:`Image source`  ``/usr/local/share/qgis/svg/arrows/Arrow_02.svg``. The position is defined by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  :guilabel:`Image source`  ``/usr/local/share/qgis/svg/arrows/Arrow_02.svg``.
  The position is defined by
```

>   ``@layout_pagewidth - @rg_layout_margin - 68.25`` for x and by ``@rg_layout_margin + 22.5``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ``@layout_pagewidth - @rg_layout_margin - 68.25`` for :guilabel:`X` and by ``@rg_layout_margin + 22.5``.
```

>   We use static numbers here to define the ``Width`` and the ``Height``: ``21,027`` and ``21,157``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  We use static numbers here to define the :guilabel:`Width` and the :guilabel:`Height`: ``21.027`` and ``21.157``.
```

  
|moderate| |FA| Creating the scalebar of the dynamic header
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

* To insert a scalebar in the header click on |addScalebar| :sup:`Adds a new Scale Bar to the layout` and

>   place it in the rectangle on top of the north arrow. From the :guilabel:`Main Properties` refer to your ``main map(Map 0)``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  place it in the rectangle above the north arrow. From the :guilabel:`Main Properties` refer to your ``main map(Map 0)``
```

>   which we created before. This means that the scale changes automatically according to the extent you choose

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This means that the scale changes automatically according to the extent you choose
```

  in the QGIS main canvas. Choose the :guilabel:`Style` ``Numeric``. This means that we insert a simple scale without

>   a scalebar. The scale still needs a position and size. For x enter ``@layout_pagewidth - @rg_layout_margin - 68.25``,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  a scalebar. The scale still needs a position and size. For :guilabel:`X` enter ``@layout_pagewidth - @rg_layout_margin - 68.25``,
```

>   for y enter ``@rg_layout_margin + 6.5``, for Width enter ``28,639`` and for Height ``13,100``. The ``Reference point``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  for :guilabel:`Y` enter ``@rg_layout_margin + 6.5``, for :guilabel:`Width` enter ``28,639``
  and for :guilabel:`Height` ``13.100``. The ``Reference point``
```

  |signPlus| button for each new variable
  and enter the names ``o_department``, ``o_name`` , ``o_adress`` and ``o_postcode`` as shown in the picture below.
  In the second row enter the detailed information about your organisation. We will use these variables in the :guilabel:`Main Properties`
  section. The position is defined by ``@layout_pagewidth - @rg_layout_margin - 49.5`` for :guilabel:`X` and
  ``@rg_layout_margin + 15.5`` for :guilabel:`Y`. :guilabel:`Width` is ``49.00`` and :guilabel:`Height`
  is defined by ``@rg_layout_header - 15.5``.

.. figure:: img/dynamic_layout_organisation.png

|moderate| |FA| Adding pictures to the dynamic header
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

* Use the |addNewImage| :sup:`Adds a new Picture to the layout` button to place a picture in the top of your
  label ``organisation information``. After entering the name ``organisation logo`` define the position
  for :guilabel:`X` with ``@layout_pagewidth - @rg_layout_margin - 48.5`` and for :guilabel:`Y` with
  ``@rg_layout_margin + 3.5``.
  The size of the logo is set to ``39.292`` for :guilabel:`Width` and ``9.583`` for :guilabel:`Height`.

>   To include a logo of your organisation you have to save your logo under your home directory and enter

Reviewer 2: "have to" sounds like there's no alternative. Afaict, the point is to have the folder set as path (no QGIS around but I wonder if without necessarily setting the folder, it's not just possible to add a single image)

  the path under :menuselection:`Main Properties --> Image Source`.
* Our layout still needs a north arrow. This will also be insterted by using |addNewImage| :sup:`Adds a new Picture to the layout`.
  Set the name to ``north arrow``, go to :guilabel:`Main Properties` and select the

>   :guilabel:`Image source`  ``/usr/local/share/qgis/svg/arrows/Arrow_02.svg``.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure this path is reachable from Windows but since the arrow should be available, I'd suggest to skip the folder part and simply use the file name.

  The position is defined by:
  ``@layout_pagewidth - @rg_layout_margin - 68.25`` for :guilabel:`X` and by ``@rg_layout_margin + 22.5``
  for :guilabel:`Y`.
  We use static numbers here to define the :guilabel:`Width` and the :guilabel:`Height`: ``21.027`` and ``21.157``.
  
|moderate| |FA| Creating the scalebar of the dynamic header
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

* To insert a scalebar in the header click on |addScalebar| :sup:`Adds a new Scale Bar to the layout` and
  place it in the rectangle above the north arrow. In :guilabel:`Map` under the :guilabel:`Main Properties`

>   choose your ``main map(Map 0)``.

Reviewer 2: I thought it would simply display the map item name (cannot check).  But I think you are missing a space.

  This means that the scale changes automatically according to the extent you choose

>   in the QGIS main canvas. Choose the :guilabel:`Style` ``Numeric``. This means that we insert a simple scale without

Reviewer 2: Not QGIS main canvas, which refers to the main interface. Here it's the layout map item which is concerned

Congratulations on your first completed QGIS map project!

|LS| Creating a Dynamic Print Layout
===============================================================================

Now that you've learned to create a basic map layout we go a step further and
create a map layout that adapts dynamically to our map extent and to the page
properties, e.g. when you change the size of the page. Also, the date of creation
will adapt dynamically.

|moderate| |FA| Creating the dynamic map canvas
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> * Load the ESRI Shapefile format dataset :file:`regions.shp` into the map canvas and adapt its properties

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Load the ESRI Shapefile format dataset :file:`regions.shp` into the map canvas and adapt its properties
```

>   to suit your own convenience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * After everything is rendered and symbolized to your liking,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. After everything is rendered and symbolized to your liking,
```

>   click the |newLayout| :sup:`New Print Layout` icon in the toolbar or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   click the |newLayout| :sup:`New Print Layout` icon in the toolbar or
```

>   choose :menuselection:`File --> New Print Layout`. You will be prompted to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   choose :menuselection:`File --> New Print Layout`. You will be prompted to
```

>   choose a title for the new layer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   choose a title for the new layer.
```

> * We want to create a map layout consisting of a header and a map with the regions of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. We want to create a map layout consisting of a header and a map with the regions of
```

>   Alaska. The layout should have a margin of 7.5 mm and the header should be 36 mm high.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Alaska. The layout should have a margin of 7.5 mm and the header should be 36 mm high.
```

> #. Go to the :guilabel:`Layout` panel and scroll down to the :guilabel:`Variables`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   #. Go to the :guilabel:`Layout` panel and scroll down to the :guilabel:`Variables`
```

Reviewer: Error message from travis: `map_composer.rst:315:Bullet list ends without a blank line; unexpected unindent.`

>    section. Here we set some variables you can use all over the dynamic print

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      section. Here we set some variables you can use all over the dynamic print
```

>    layout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      layout.
```
